TestModels/aws-sdks/ddbv2/README.md, before:

# AWS-SDK-DDB

This project tests the [AWS DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/) Operations `QUERY, GET, and PUT` in `dafny`. The project utilizes the `aws-sdk-ddb smithy model` to generate the dafny types using `polymorph`. This interface is then used in the dafny to call the appropriate operations. The actual implementation of the DynamoDB Operations are provided by the underlying native runtime. These integration tests aim to verify the correctness of the polymorph generated code and is run either as CI actions or manually.

NOTE: The `model.json` in this project comes from [private-aws-encryption-sdk-dafny-staging/ComAmazonawsDynamodb/Model/dynamodb](https://github.com/aws/private-aws-encryption-sdk-dafny-staging/tree/v4-seperate-modules/ComAmazonawsDynamodb/Model/dynamodb), and is different from the standard model at https://github.com/aws/aws-models/ddb/
This v2 version uses the smithy 2.0 model and should be compatible with the latest/v2 sdk of a runtime.

## Build

### Python

1. Generate the Wrappers using `polymorph`

```
make polymorph_dafny polymorph_python
```

2. Transpile the tests (and implementation) to the target runtime.

```
make transpile_python
```

3. Generate the executable in the .NET and execute the tests

```
make test_python
```

## Development

1. To add another target runtime support, edit the `Makefile` and add the appropriate recipe to generate the `polymorph` wrappers, and dafny transpilation.
2. Provide any glue code between dafny and target runtime if required.
3. Build, execute, and test in the target runtime.

_Example_

`--output-python <PATH>` in the `gradlew run` is used to generate the polymorph wrappers. Similarly `translate <RUNTIME>` flags is used in dafny recipe to transpile to runtime.

Commit message:

feat: enable ddbv2 support (#663)
* feat: enable ddbv2 support

* feat: enable kmsv2 support

* fix: enum patch Java

* fix: formatting

* fix: dotnet patch

* fix: PR Comments

---------

Co-authored-by: Shubham Chaturvedi <scchatur@amazon.com>
Co-authored-by: Robin Salkeld <salkeldr@amazon.com>

TestModels/aws-sdks/ddbv2/README.md, after:

# AWS-SDK-DDB

This project tests the [AWS DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/) Operations `QUERY, GET, and PUT` in `dafny`. The project utilizes the `aws-sdk-ddb smithy model` to generate the dafny types using `polymorph`. This interface is then used in the dafny to call the appropriate operations. The actual implementation of the DynamoDB Operations are provided by the underlying native runtime. These integration tests aim to verify the correctness of the polymorph generated code and is run either as CI actions or manually.

NOTE: The `model.json` in this project comes from [private-aws-encryption-sdk-dafny-staging/ComAmazonawsDynamodb/Model/dynamodb](https://github.com/aws/private-aws-encryption-sdk-dafny-staging/tree/v4-seperate-modules/ComAmazonawsDynamodb/Model/dynamodb), and is different from the standard model at https://github.com/aws/aws-models/ddb/
This v2 version uses the smithy 2.0 model and should be compatible with the latest/v2 sdk of a runtime.

It also has modified `DisableKinesisStreamingDestination` and `EnableKinesisStreamingDestination` inputs and outputs.
These operations use handwritten `structure`s to follow the smithy guidelines of not reusing Input and Output shapes.
Most of the smithy-codegen do this while reading the model, but smithy-dafny .NET and Java don't do this transformation
and end up generating code which is not compatible with the corresponding sdks. Hence this model is modified to make it work with
smithy-dafny .NET and Java. All other codegens (and sdks) should work as expected - since their transformation would behave as
an Indentity transformation for this modified model.

## Build

### Python

1. Generate the Wrappers using `polymorph`

```
make polymorph_dafny polymorph_python
```

2. Transpile the tests (and implementation) to the target runtime.

```
make transpile_python
```

3. Generate the executable in the .NET and execute the tests

```
make test_python
```

## Development

1. To add another target runtime support, edit the `Makefile` and add the appropriate recipe to generate the `polymorph` wrappers, and dafny transpilation.
2. Provide any glue code between dafny and target runtime if required.
3. Build, execute, and test in the target runtime.

_Example_

`--output-python <PATH>` in the `gradlew run` is used to generate the polymorph wrappers. Similarly `translate <RUNTIME>` flags is used in dafny recipe to transpile to runtime.
